Rule: Text spacing via CSS is above minimum value or not set to `!important` (24afc2, 78fd32, 9e45ec) (#1412)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/word-spacing-not-important-9e45ec.md

---
id: 9e45ec
name: Word spacing in `style` attributes is not `!important`
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that the word spacing can be adjusted by the user, i.e. that `!important` is not applied to the style, unless the style has already exceeded the specified metric for retaining content visibility and functionality.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.12: # Text Spacing (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Jey Nandakumar
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any HTML element that is [visible][], for which the `style` attribute [declares][declared][][word-spacing][] CSS property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule applies to any HTML element that is [visible][], for which the `style` attribute [declares][declared] the [word-spacing][] CSS property.
```

## Expectation 1

For the test target's [word-spacing][] property, one of the following is true:

- the [declared][] value specified via the `style` attribute does not have the [important flag][]; or
- the [computed][] value is at least `0.16` times its [computed][] [font-size][].

## Assumptions

> If there is a mechanism available on the page by which word spacing can be adjusted, failing this rule might not mean [success criterion 1.4.12 Text spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#text-spacing) is not satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no mechanism available on the page to adjust word spacing. If there is such a mechanism, failing this rule might not mean [success criterion 1.4.12 Text spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#text-spacing) is not satisfied.
```
The assumption is the first sentence. The "If" sentence is a fact that is always true, not an assumption.

## Accessibility Support

While some assistive technologies are able to set [user origin][] styles, others, such as browser extensions, are only able to set style with the [author origin][]. Such assistive technologies can not create styles with a high enough [priority][] to override a `style` attribute with the [important flag][]. If accessibility support does not include assistive technologies that override word spacing through [author origin][], this rule should not be used.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This `strong` element has a `word-spacing` of `0.12em !important` which is equal to the recommended minimum, given the specified font size is `1em`.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			font-size: 1em;
		}
	</style>

	<body>

> 		<strong style="word-spacing: 0.12em !important;">

Reviewer 2: Should this not be 0.16em to be equal to the recommended minimum?

			The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
		</strong>
	</body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This `p` element has a [word-spacing][] of `12px` specified via the style attribute, which is above the recommended minimum given the specified font size is `1em`.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			font-size: 1em;
		}
	</style>

	<body>
		<p style="word-spacing: 12px;">
			The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
		</p>
	</body>
</html>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> This `strong` element has a `word-spacing` of `2.5px !important` (equals `0.15625em` ) which is below the recommended minimum, given the specified font size is 16 pixels.

Reviewer 2: This description does not match the example

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			font-size: 16px;
		}
	</style>

	<body>

> 		<strong style="word-spacing: 8px !important;">

Reviewer 2: Regarding earlier comment, I think this needs to change for the maths in the description to be correct...

```suggestion
		<strong style="word-spacing: 2.5px !important;">
```

This text is not [visible][] because it is positioned off screen.

```html
<p style="position: absolute; top: -999em">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This `body` element does not have a `style` attribute specified.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			word-spacing: 10px;
		}
	</style>
	<body>
		The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
	</body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

> This `p` element has a [word-spacing][] of `12px` specified via the style attribute, but does not have the [important flag][].

Reviewer: Now Passing.

Reviewer 2: Agree again. With similar thoughts on including a passed example with too small a word-spacing and no !important flag, and using fixed units in the examples.

---
id: 9e45ec
name: Word spacing in `style` attributes is not `!important`
rule_type: atomic
description: |

> 	This rule checks that the `style` attribute is not used to prevent adjusting `word-spacing` spacing by using `!important`, except if it's at least `0.16` times the font size.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	This rule checks that the `style` attribute is not used to prevent adjusting `word-spacing` by using `!important`, except if it's at least `0.16` times the font size.
```

> ---

Reviewer: Big problem with this rule. See https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1412#issuecomment-733606665

CSS specifications define each declaration as being either [important][] (if is as the `!important` annotation) or [normal][]. Given that `normal` is also a keyword for this property, and that `!important` is wider known that this distinction, this rule rather uses "[important][]"/"not [important][]" to avoid confusion.

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

> 
> Some examples use a fixed font size to demonstrate specific aspects of the rule (notably in order to provide a [computed][] value for the property). Some Passed Examples set the `word-spacing` property below the minimum, but do so in a way that can be overridden by styles with [author origin][]. These are however not very good practices and should be avoided.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

- **normal**: the [computed][] value of its [word-spacing][] property is [normal][]; or
- **cascade**: the [cascaded][] value of its [word-spacing][] property is not a value [declared][] in its `style` attribute.

## Assumptions

- There is no mechanism available on the page to adjust [word-spacing][]. If there is such a mechanism, it is possible to fail this rule while [Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text Spacing][sc1412] is still satisfied.

- This rule assumes that WCAG's meaning for the "Word spacing style property" is literally the value of the CSS `word-spacing` property rather than the actual space between words. The value of the CSS property is _added_ to whichever spacing already exist (for example, the size of the space character). Thus, the actual space between words is larger than the value of the `word-spacing` property. If [Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text Spacing][sc1412] is concerned by the actual space between words, then this rule may fail (with the `word-spacing` property being too small) while the Success Criterion is still satisfied (with the actual space being enough).

> - This rule assumes that text inside the target is not justified. The actual space between words may be further adjusted to justify text. This results in the space being sometimes larger and sometimes smaller. On lines where inter-words space is _added_, this rule may fail while [Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text Spacing][sc1412] is still satisfied (because the added space tip it over the limit); on lines where inter-letters space is _removed_, failing this rule will fail [Success Criterion 1.4.12 Text Spacing][sc1412]. For elements rendered on multiple lines, it is safe to assume that justification will not always add space. For single line elements (for example, a `span` inside a justified `p`), it may end up in a line with added space. Note that justifying text is a failure of [Success Criterion 1.4.8 Visual Presentation][sc148]

Reviewer 4: From the look of it, justified text adjusts the space character, while still preserving word-spacing. This assumption might not be necessary.

#### Passed Example 1

> This `strong` element has a `word-spacing` of `1.92pt !important` (equals `0.12em`) which is equal to the recommended minimum, given the specified font size is `1em`.

Reviewer: The `strong` should also have relative units now.

</html>
```

#### Passed Example 2

> This `p` element has a [word-spacing][] of `12px` specified via the style attribute, which is above the recommended minimum given the specified font size is `1em`.

Reviewer: The `p` should use relative units.

Author: I wanted to keep a few examples in non relative units. Is that ok?

Reviewer 2: The suggestion to use relative units was to demonstrate good practice in our examples. If the font-size is using a relative unit, the word-spacing probably should as well.

Perhaps use fixed units for examples where the minimum requirements have been significantly exceeded.

Reviewer 2: I think its nicer to have both units the same in each example.
